"HOWARD C. BERG ","Herchel Smith Professor of Physics, Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","hberg@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-0924 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 3063A, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Motile behavior of bacteria Flagellated bacteria possess a remarkable motility system based on a reversible rotary motor linked by a flexible coupling (the proximal hook) to a thin helical propeller (the flagellar filament). The motor derives its energy from protons driven into the cell by chemical gradients or electrical fields. The direction of the motor rotation depends in part on signals generated by sensory systems, of which the best studied analyzes chemical stimuli. Our research group is trying to learn how the motor works, the nature of the signal that controls the motor's direction of rotation, and how this signal is processed by the chemical sensory system. These questions are being approached by a variety of molecular-genetic and physical techniques. The goal is an understanding of chemiosmotic coupling and sensory transduction at the molecular level. "
"HOWARD C. BERG ","Herchel Smith Professor of Physics, Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","hberg@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-0924 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 3063A, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Motile behavior of bacteria Flagellated bacteria possess a remarkable motility system based on a reversible rotary motor linked by a flexible coupling (the proximal hook) to a thin helical propeller (the flagellar filament). The motor derives its energy from protons driven into the cell by chemical gradients or electrical fields. The direction of the motor rotation depends in part on signals generated by sensory systems, of which the best studied analyzes chemical stimuli. Our research group is trying to learn how the motor works, the nature of the signal that controls the motor's direction of rotation, and how this signal is processed by the chemical sensory system. These questions are being approached by a variety of molecular-genetic and physical techniques. The goal is an understanding of chemiosmotic coupling and sensory transduction at the molecular level. "
"DANIEL  BRANTON ","Higgins Professor of Biology, Emeritus, ","dbranton@harvard.edu ","617-495-2685 ","Jefferson Laboratory, 15 Oxford Street, Room 254, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Nanopore Technology: A novel technology for probing, and eventually sequencing, individual DNA molecules using single-channel recording techniques has been conceived. Single molecules of DNA are drawn through a small channel or nanopore that functions as a sensitive detector. The detection schemes being developed will transduce the different chemical and physical properties of each base into a characteristic electronic signal. Nanopore sequencing has the potential of reading very long stretches of DNA at rates exceeding 1 base per millisecond. For more information about this project, please go to http://mcb.harvard.edu/branton/index.htm. "
"BRIANA  BURTON ","Assistant Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","bburton@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-384-6617 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room BL 3035, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Membrane-bound DNA transport machines involved in antibiotic resistance, chromosome segregation, and spore formation How do cells move one of the largest and most hydrophilic biological molecules across hydrophobic membrane barriers? This is the broad question our laboratory seeks to understand. In bacteria alone, this process is involved in the transfer of antibiotic resistance, spore formation, and proper chromosome segregation during growth. Yet, very little is known about the molecular mechanism of DNA translocation across membranes in any system, as tools to study the mechanism of DNA transporters in their biological context at the membrane have been lacking. We combine in vitro and in vivo biochemistry, microscopy, microbiology and molecular biology to study these DNA transport complexes. DNA transport during sporulation Proper chromosome segregation is essential for successful cell division in all organisms. Interestingly, bacterial cells often form a division septum prior to completion of DNA segregation. Sporulating Bacillus subtilis cells provide an extreme example of this phenomenon in that they must transport more than 3 Megabases of a chromosome across a division septum and into the small cellular compartment that will become the spore. SpoIIIE, a member of a large family of bacterial and archeal membrane-bound ATPases (FtsK/SpoIIIE), is required for active transport of the chromosomal DNA at the division septum during sporulation. Using quantitative fluorescence microscopy, and in vivo DNA transport assays to study the oligomeric state and transport properties of the SpoIIIE complex led to the very surprising and novel result that the DNA is transported across two membranes during sporulation. These data predict a new model for DNA transport in which the transmembrane segments of the transporter form linked DNA-conducting channels across the two lipid bilayers of the septum. This system provides a unique opportunity to tackle this interesting phenomenon using complimentary in vivo and in vitro approaches and to address issues which have significant implications for our understanding of how cells efficiently move of large nucleic acids across membranes. "
"PHILIPPE  CLUZEL ","Gordon McKay Professor of Applied Physics (SEAS), Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","cluzel@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-384-9447 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 435.30, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: The research of the laboratory focuses on real-time systems analysis of signal transduction and genetic networks at the single cell level. "
"VICTORIA  D'SOUZA ","Assistant Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","dsouza@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-384-8229 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 243, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Discovering the structural basis of retroviral replication Retroviruses are associated with a wide range of clinical diseases, including leukemia, tumors, and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is an exceptionally deadly retrovirus that has caused more than 20 million deaths over the past two decades. Due to the emergence of resistant strains, it is unlikely that current drug strategies, which target individual proteins, will lead to a cure. There is a serious need for superior approaches: for example, targeting anti-viral drugs towards essential RNA-protein or protein-protein interactions. To this end, I am interested in studying the structural determinants of reverse transcription and gene translation in retroviruses like HIV, Human T-cell leukemia virus and Moloney murine leukemia virus (MLV). Although aspects of reverse transcription and gene translation have received considerable attention, understanding of RNA structures and events that promote or regulate these steps remain primitive. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and other biophysical and biochemical methods are the principal tools used in my laboratory to study these relatively large RNA and protein molecules. The structure determination of large protein- RNA complexes by NMR is extremely challenging, but the potential payoff is high and should ultimately lead to detailed models of steps involved in retroviral replication. The following are some of the projects that are currently being studied in my lab: Primer placement and initiation of reverse transcription For successful retroviral infection to occur, the RNA genome must be reverse-transcribed into DNA by the enzyme reverse transcriptase. The primer needed for the first synthetic step of reverse transcription is a specific tRNA molecule from the host that is packaged into the virion during assembly. This tRNA is annealed to the 5&#8217; end of the viral genome called the Primer Binding Site (PBS), and requires the presence of a viral nucleocapsid protein (NC) to facilitate the necessary nucleic acid rearrangements. Studies in my laboratory are intended to provide the structural details of these tRNA-PBS-NC complexes and elucidate mechanisms that promote the initiation of reverse transcription. Readthrough translation: In retroviruses, the structural Gag protein and the enzymatic Pol proteins are generated from the same precursor mRNA either by a frameshift or a readthrough mechanism. For example, MLV uses the readthorugh strategy and has the two genes separated by a single UAG stop codon. About nintey-five percent of the translating ribosomes recognize this codon and end the Gag protein. The other five percent, however, insert a glutamine residue at this position before resuming downstream translation into the pol gene. This 20:1 ratio of Gag to Gag-Pol is known to be vital for viral infectivity. Interestingly, the Gag stop codon is immediately followed by a sequence of RNA predicted to form a pseudoknot. Studies have shown this sequence to be critical for the readthrough function. In collaboration with Dr. Stephen Goff&#8217;s lab at Columbia University, my goal is to elucidate the solution structure and the mechanisms by which this pseudoknot functions to maintain the Gag/Gag-Pol ratio. "
"VLAD  DENIC ","Assistant Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","vdenic@mcb.harvard.edu ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 445.30, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: The application of novel methodologies for studying biology at a genome-wide level has been a remarkably successful means of cataloging the components required for many cellular processes. At the same time, however, this has created a bottleneck at the level of going from parts lists to functional and mechanistic insights. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the study of membrane-associated processes. This area of cell biology has been particularly difficult to dissect by classical biochemistry but now stands poised to benefit from targeted and systematic biochemical reconstitution strategies that make use of the identified components. My lab is interested in bridging this post-genomic gap as it pertains to the study of very long-chain fatty acids, insertion of tail-anchored proteins into the endoplasmic reticulum membrane, and autophagy. "
"JOHN E. DOWLING ","Harvard College Professor, Llura and Gordon Gund Professor of Neuroscience, ","dowling@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-2245 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 2081, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: The vertebrate retina is an accessible part of the central nervous system; an understanding of retinal mechanisms should provide clues concerning neural mechanisms throughout the brain. Over the years, our group has been concerned with the cells of the retina, their structure, function and synaptic interactions. Our current interests are focused in two directions; both employ the zebrafish as a model system First, we have developed behavioral tests to isolate visual system specific mutations from chemically-mutagenized zebrafish. Both recessive and dominant mutations that affect the retina have been isolated and are currently being analyzed histologically, electrophysiologically and biochemically. Ongoing screening is continually revealing new mutants. A second interest is the molecular basis of retinal development. In particular, the effects of retinoic acid on candidate genes involved in early eye and photoreceptor development are being explored as well as detailed examination of early retinal development in zebrafish. "
"CATHERINE  DULAC ","Higgins Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute Investigator, ","dulac@fas.harvard.edu ","617-495-7893 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 4017, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Our group is using molecular, genetic and electrophysiological techniques to explore the molecular and neuronal basis of innate social behaviors in the mouse. Two major lines of research are currently being pursued in the laboratory: We are pursuing several projects at the molecular, cellular and systems levels in order to investigate the architecture and functional logic of neuronal circuits underlying pheromone signaling. The key questions we are addressing are: What is the nature of the mammalian pheromones and of the receptors that detect them? How are pheromone signals processed in the brain in order to generate species- and sex-specific behaviors such as aggression, mating, parental behavior, defensive behavior? What are the basic developmental processes that ensure appropriate neuronal connections between the olfactory sensory neurons and the brain? What are the respective roles of sensory experience and genetic information in setting appropriate pheromone-induced behaviors, and how are circuits underlying sex-specific behaviors established in the male and female brains? The second set of projects explores the phenomenon of genomic imprinting in the brain, and the role of this mode of epigenetic modification in brain development and adult brain function. Genomic imprinting results in preferential expression of the paternally, or the maternally inherited allele of certain genes. We have recently used a genome-wide approach to characterize the repertoire of imprinted genes in the mouse embryonic and adult CNS. Our study uncovered over 1000 new loci with imprinted features, suggesting that imprinting is a major mode of epigenetic regulation in the brain. Imprinting appears to preferentially affect neural systems associated with social, motivational and homeostatic brain functions. Comparison of the imprinted gene repertoire in the adult hypothalamus and cortex, and in the developing brain demonstrates a complex spatiotemporal, species-, sex- and isoform-specific regulation. Genomic imprinting thus emerges as a major and dynamic mode of epigenetic regulation of brain function, with direct implications for the understanding of evolution and diseases. Future projects in the lab will aim at better understanding this mode of epigenetic regulation in mechanistic and functional terms. "
"FLORIAN  ENGERT ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","florian@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-4382 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 2073, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Neuroscientists have long been working to understand how biological structures can produce the complex behaviors that are generated by the nervous system. However, even the basic operational principles governing a brain’s interconnected network of cells have remained painfully elusive. My laboratory is working on a scientific strategy focused on building a complete, multi-level picture of simple neural circuits that will advance our basic understanding of brain function and offers a complete view into the neuronal activity underlying a series of relatively complex behaviors. We are taking a first step towards this rather lofty goal via the comprehensive identification and examination of neural circuits controlling behavior in the larval zebrafish. This small and translucent vertebrate exhibits a series of visually induced behaviors which can be analyzed quantitatively down to the individual motor components. Using behavioral assays in combination with various calcium indicators and two-photon microscopy we monitor neuronal activity throughout the fish brain in an awake and intact preparation. An extended goal of our research is the study of how changes or variations in the behavior are reflected in changes in the underlying neuronal activity. To that end, we have developed several quantitative learning assays and tools for in vivo monitoring – and controlling - of neural activity in freely swimming larvae. "
"RAYMOND L. ERIKSON ","John F. Drum American Cancer Society Professor of Cellular and Developmental Biology, ","erikson@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-5386 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 4070C, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Reversible protein phosphorylation and cell proliferation. Our studies focus on the role of reversible phosphorylation in the regulation of essential steps in cell proliferation. Recently we have focused on the functions and regulation of polo-like kinases (Plk) in mammalian cells. Three mammalian Plks have been identified; Plk1 is expressed during M phase and cytokinesis, whereas Plk2 (Snk) and Plk3 (Fnk) are expressed in other phases of the cell cycle. These enzymes are characterized by their similar N-terminal catalytic domains, as well as a C-terminal domain with highly conserved sequences termed the polo box. We have previously demonstrated that the polo box directs Plk1 to specific cellular locations and is required together with protein kinase activity to promote cell proliferation. Plk1 localizes to centrosomes and the spindle poles at metaphase, in the central spindle during anaphase, and at the midbody during cytokinesis. Plk1 has been implicated in centrosome maturation, bipolar spindle formation and activation of the anaphase-promoting complex. We have determined that intramolecular interactions of the catalytic and non-catalytic domains, as well as phosphorylation of Plk1 regulate the activation of its protein kinase activity. Our use of small interfering RNA to deplete Plk1 in cells demonstrates that it is required for centrosome duplication, anaphase and cytokinesis in mammalian cells. Cancer cells depleted of Plk1 rapidly undergo apoptosis. We are investigating whether this occurs in a wide variety of tumor cells or normal cells, as Plk1 may be a useful chemotherapy target. A major effort in our laboratory is directed at identification and characterization of Plk1 substrates. Mitotic motor proteins, including the mitotic kinesin-like protein (MKLP1/CHO1), are of special interest. We also study the changes in function of substrates after mutation of sites phosphorylated by Plk1. "
"NICOLE  FRANCIS ","Associate Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","francis@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-9391 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 2033A, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Mechanisms of Epigenetic Inheritance by Polycomb Group Proteins          My lab aims to understand the nature of epigenetic information and how it is inherited.  We use biochemical methods to study how Drosophila Polycomb Group proteins affect chromatin, and how changes in chromatin can be inherited. Cellular differentiation involves the stepwise establishment of cell-type specific genetic programs in proliferating cell lineages; once established, these programs can be stable for the lifetime of an organism. Yet, signals that direct differentiation can be transient so that other mechanisms, such as those encoded by the Polycomb Group (PcG) and trithorax Group (trxG) genes, are used to maintain the gene expression patterns that encode cellular identities. These epigenetic mechanisms are thought to involve changes in chromatin structure that fix gene expression patterns in a manner that is inherited through cell division.  This allows the expression pattern of a gene to reflect the ancestry of the cell it resides in.   For example, during the first few hours of development in Drosophila, precise patterns of HOX gene expression along the anterior-posterior axis are established by the actions of the Gap and pair-rule genes.  This pattern of expression encodes the identity of body segments; thus if HOX genes are inappropriately expressed in more anterior segments, those segments form posterior instead of anterior structures.  This can happen either because the correct HOX gene expression pattern is not established initially, or because the pattern is not maintained.  The maintenance of HOX gene repression requires the PcG, while maintenance of active transcription requires the trxG. In mammals PcG genes are also important for neural and hematopoietic development and stem cell self-renewal, and they are misregulated in several cancers. PcG proteins function in large complexes that modify chromatin structure and repress transcription.  Two PcG complexes have been characterized, Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1), and ESC-E(Z).  They have distinct biochemical activities towards chromatin and collaborate to maintain gene repression.  PRC1 alters chromatin structure in a manner that inhibits both ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling and transcription.  ESC-E(Z) methylates histone H3 on lysine 27, perhaps providing a stable mark for PcG repressed chromatin.  Characterization of PcG complexes has begun to uncover how PcG proteins might use chromatin structure to block transcription, but does not provide an explanation for how these PcG dependent chromatin structures are inherited in each cell cycle. Both DNA replication and mitosis involve changes in chromatin structure, which might interfere with PcG protein actions.  It therefore seems likely that there are specific mechanisms operating as chromatin progresses through the cell cycle to ensure that PcG-mediated repression is maintained.  Indeed, regulation of single genes involves more than 15 PcG gene products, some of which might be specifically involved in inheritance.  Our goal is to reconstitute steps in epigenetic inheritance in vitro to dissect the biochemical mechanisms involved.  Replication of chromatin in the presence or absence of PcG proteins is carried out in cell free systems, and the effect of DNA replication on PcG activities determined.  We aim to determine requirements for duplication of PcG dependent chromatin structures, and whether inheritance is mechanistically separable from transcriptional repression. A second project in the lab is the characterization of chromatin structure alterations induced by one PcG complex, PRC1.  Data obtained using a four-protein recombinant core of this complex suggests that each PcG complex clusters 3-4 nucleosomes, leading to compaction of nucleosomal arrays.  One way this could occur is if the complex has multiple nucleosome binding sites; we will test this idea and identify the nucleosome binding site(s) in the complex.  The clustering of nucleosomes by PcG complexes might represent a novel way of folding chromatin, which will be determined by comparing the orientation of nucleosomes in PcG-compacted chromatin to those in chromatin compacted by histone H1. "
"RACHELLE  GAUDET ","Associate Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","gaudet@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-5616 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 229B, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Structural biology of ion channels and transporters We use a combination of x-ray crystallography and other biophysical and biochemical techniques to study the stereochemistry of signaling and transport through biological membranes. Structural studies of TRP channels The goal is to elucidate the gating mechanism of TRP ion channels involved in temperature sensing and understand modulatory interactions of proteins and small molecules with TRP channels. We are particularly interested in determining the molecular mechanism of temperature sensing. We therefore focus on the temperature-sensing TRP channels such as TRPV1, TRPV2, and TRPM8. Several temperature-sensing TRP channels like TRPV1, TRPV2 and TRPA1 are expressed in nociceptor neurons, and therefore responsible for pain sensations in response to noxious stimuli. The biophysical and biochemical mechanisms of pain and heat sensing are not only of academic interest, but also of medical and pharmacological interest. With structures of these TRP channels, we will be better equipped to design chemical inhibitors, which could potentially be used therapeutically. Structural studies of TAP, the ABC transporter associated with antigen processing The goal is to elucidate how TAP, a heterodimer of two membrane-spanning proteins, TAP1 and TAP2, transports peptides generated by the proteasome in the cytosol into the endoplasmic reticulum for loading onto MHC class I molecules. Loaded class I molecules then travel to the cell surface and present the peptides to T cells, an immune system mechanism to recognize and eliminate deregulated or tumorigenic cells, virally-infected cells and foreign cells (e.g. graft rejection). We have undertaken structural studies of the cytosolic C-terminal nucleotide bingin domains (NBDs) of TAP1 and TAP2 to understand how ATP binding and hydrolysis fuels peptide transport. Furthermore, we have overexpressed the full-length TAP ABC transporter at levels adequate for biochemical and crystallographic studies. We also use cell-based and in vitro biochemical assays to determine the effects of deletions and substitutions within the TAP1 and TAP2 proteins. Structural studies of Nramp proteins Metals such as iron and manganese are essential to physiological processes such as oxygen transport and energy metabolism. Nramps (natural resistance-associated macrophage proteins) are transporters that allow the proton-driven import of divalent metal ions into cells. Humans have two Nramp homologs. Nramp1 transports metals across the phagolysosomal membrane of macrophages and other phagocytic cells, and is important for the antimicrobial function of these cells. DMT1 (divalent metal transporter 1, also known as Nramp2 or DCT1) is responsible for absorption of dietary iron and manganese in the proximal duodenum. Furthermore, DMT1 allows assimilation of transferrin-bound iron by the red blood cell precursors in specialized endosomal compartments. The goal is to determine the molecular mechanism of metal-ion transport by the Nramp family of proteins through structural studies of a bacterial Nramp protein, MntH. "
"WILLIAM M. GELBART ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","gelbart@morgan.harvard.edu ","617-495-2906 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 4059, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Developmental Genetics Work in our laboratory is aimed at understanding the molecular basis of pattern formation in higher animals. In other words, how does an organism go from a single cell (the newly fertilized egg) to a complex multicellular structure with an enormous diversity of cell types, with each cell deployed in the proper spatial position for its particular physiological role? Further, how does the developmental program that exists in the egg lead to the reliable production of specific pattern elements, such as hands with a very specific set of five fingers in humans? One important aspect of patterning is the ability of cells within a given tissue primordium to communicate their geographic position and their developmental state to neighboring cells. Our particular focus is on studying an important pathway for such cell-cell signaling using the fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) because of the powerful combination of genetic, developmental and molecular tools available in this system. This signaling system involves the protein product of the decapentaplegic (dpp) gene which we discovered about 15 years ago. The dpp protein is a member of the TGF-ß family of signaling molecules and some family members make fundamental contributions to early vertebrate development as well. The dpp protein is secreted and binds to cell surface receptors on target cells. The dpp signal is necessary for determination of the dorsal ectoderm in the early embryo, for morphogenesis of the gut, for growth in the proximal to distal axis of the adult appendages, for proper oogenesis and patterning of the eggshell, and numerous other developmental events. Our current focus is on elucidating the cellular and developmental pathways by which the dpp signal acts. We are using a combination of genetic analyses and molecular approaches to address these topics, in particular, focusing on the identification and characterization of genes that encode products which interact with the dpp protein. (1) At the cellular level, we wish to understand the nature of the signal transduction cascade that is activated in cells in which the dpp receptor protein is activated. We now know that dpp receptors are complexes of transmembrane proteins that have extracellular domains that bind dpp protein and intracellular domains that act as serine-threonine protein kinases. Presumably, these kinases act to phosphorylate target proteins in the cell and trigger several sequential signaling steps until finally, the activities of transcription factors in the nuclei of these cells are altered. However, the identities of the proteins involved in this process are known. (2) At the developmental level, we want to understand the role that dpp contributes to pattern formation and how this role is coordinated with other aspects of these pattern formation events. In these processes, we are particularly interested in the processes underlying appendage development, dorsal-ventral patterning of the embryo and eggshell development during oogenesis. Research topics in the laboratory are numerous, and can range from genetic to embryological to molecular studies or a mix of several of these approaches. "
"KARINE A. GIBBS ","Assistant Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","kagibbs@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-1637 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 3055, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: The goal of our research is to understand how cells and organisms distinguish between self and other. Specifically, we are investigating the molecular mechanisms underlying the ability of cells to discriminate self from non-self in the uropathogen Proteus mirabilis. The Gram-negative bacterium P. mirabilis is an opportunistic pathogen that causes urinary tract infections, most significantly in patients with long-term indwelling catheters. P. mirabilis populations can form crystalline biofilms and can cause the formation of kidney stones in patients. P. mirabilis populations display a remarkable phenomenon when migrating as a swarm across a surface: a visible boundary forms between swarms of different P. mirabilis strains. In contrast, swarms of the same strain do not give rise to a visible boundary and merge, indicating that P. mirabilis swarms are capable of territoriality and of self versus non-self recognition. This self vs non-self recognition behavior in P. mirabilis is similar to allorecognition in eukaryotic cells and is analogous to territoriality in larger organisms. Conspecific self vs non-self recognition is widely found throughout biology, including E. coli, Plasmodium, plant roots, marine chordates, and vertebrate immune systems. Connecting these is a fundamental question: how does a cell recognize and differentiate self from non-self? Recently we have identified a genetic locus in P. mirabilis that encodes components necessary for self vs non-self recognition and for the definition of strain-specific identity. We utilize approaches to microbiology, cell biology, molecular biology, and biochemistry to further dissect the role of these identified genes in self vs non-self recognition and moreover to understand the molecular mechanisms of social behaviors in bacteria. "
"GUIDO  GUIDOTTI ","Higgins Professor of Biochemistry, ","guidotti@fas.harvard.edu ","617-495-2308 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 387, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Structure and Function of Membrane Proteins The function and regulation of membrane proteins involved in the transfer of solutes (channels and transporters) and of information (receptors) across the plasma membrane are the subjects of research in this laboratory. The particular proteins under study are the insulin receptor, the (Na,K) ATPase, an insulin-activated cation channel, channels and transporters for ATP, and an ecto-apyrase. "
"J. WOODLAND HASTINGS ","Paul C. Mangelsdorf Professor of Natural Sciences, ","hastings@fas.harvard.edu ","617-495-3714 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 4070A, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: BIOLUMINESCENCE , namely the ability to emit light, is a remarkable example of convergent evolution. It has originated and evolved independently many times in many different organisms; the different systems are thus biochemically distinct and have many diverse functions. Studies with luminous bacteria led to the discovery of autoinduction, now referred to as quorum sensing. Studies with coelenterate bioluminescence led to the first discovery of an accessory emitter in bioluminescence, green fluoresent protein (GFP). Research in my laboratory is now concerned with the structure, organization and regulation of genes associated with both dipteran and dinoflagellate luminescence systems, as well as the structures of the luciferins and luciferases. CIRCADIAN (daily) CONTROL represents a very fundamental yet still very poorly understood feature of higher organisms. Jet lag is a symptom of the disruption of our circadian system. Most organisms--as well as individual eukaryotic cells and some bacteria--possess a temporal control mechanism over many biochemical and physiological processes. Our research is concerned with the basic molecular and cellular mechanisms responsible for these rhythms in the unicellular bioluminescent dinoflagellate Gonyaulax polyedra, where we have shown that the rhythm of bioluminescence involves a daily synthesis and destruction of proteins, and that inhibitors of protein synthesis can reset the phase. While the amounts of these proteins increase and decrease by a factor of 10 on a daily basis, the mRNAs for these proteins remain at the same level day and night. Synthesis is thus controlled at the translational level, a feature so far unique to this system. "
"TAKAO  HENSCH ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Professor of Neurology, ","hensch@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-384-5882 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 347.10, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Much of our adult behavior reflects the neural circuits sculpted by experience in infancy and early childhood. At no other time in life does the surrounding environment so potently shape brain function &#8211; from basic motor skills, sensation or sleep to higher cognitive processes like language. Understanding how this plasticity waxes and wanes with age carries an impact far beyond neuroscience, including education policy, therapeutic approaches to developmental disorders or strategies for recovery from brain injury in adulthood. Our laboratory explores the mechanisms underlying critical periods of brain development. Research is aimed at the interface between cell biology and neuroscience - applying cellular/molecular techniques to elucidate complex neural systems. We have achieved the first direct control over critical period timing in the visual system (Hensch 2005). By manipulating inhibitory transmission in the neocortex, amblyopic effects of deprivation are delayed (by gene-targeted reduction of GABA synthesis) or accelerated (by cortical infusion of a positive GABA receptor modulator, diazepam). A major goal now is to establish the generality of this principle of excitatory-inhibitory balance across brain regions and systems. Remarkably, a specific, local inhibitory circuit may drive critical period onset in visual cortex. Downstream of this trigger lies an extracellular proteolytic cascade and structural reorganizations, which ultimately consolidate plasticity. Imaging efforts at the Center for Brain Science will visualize the dynamic re-wiring of connections in mouse models to provide further insight for translational research into disorders of critical period development at Children&#8217;s Hospital Boston. "
"CRAIG P. HUNTER ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","hunter@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-8309 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 3044, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Systemic RNAi and intercellular RNA transport We are interested in the mechanisms of intercellular RNA transport that supports systemic RNAi in C. elegans and are investigating the developmental and signaling defects associated with mutations in these RNA transport proteins in C. elegans and mice. A remarkable property of RNA interference (RNAi) in C. elegans is its association with intercellular RNA transport pathways. This linkage mobilizes dsRNA-silencing signals and enables silencing to spread from the site of initiation throughout the animal and to the progeny. This phenomenon, known as systemic RNAi, is a conserved process among many multicellular organisms. Through genetic analysis, we have isolated systemic RNAi defective mutants (sid) and have identified the corresponding proteins (SID). SID-1 is a widely conserved dsRNA channel that selectively and specifically transports dsRNA into cells and is essential for systemic RNAi. A mammalian SID-1 homolog has been implicated in cytoplasmic delivery of modified siRNAs, suggesting that dsRNA transport is a conserved function for this family of channel proteins. SID-2 is a putative dsRNA receptor that is expressed and localized exclusively to the luminal membrane of the intestine. SID-2 transports ingested dsRNA across the intestinal epithelium into the animal to trigger RNAi. This process of sequence-specific gene silencing in response to environmentally-encountered dsRNA, known as environmental RNAi, is widespread throughout nature, including in mammals. The long-term objective of our research is to understand the physiological importance and mechanism of intercellular RNA transport in animals. "
"DAVID  JERUZALMI ","Associate Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","David.Jeruzalmi@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-9734 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 229, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Decoding the internal workings of the protein assemblies that catalyze complex biological functions remains the imperative of structural molecular biology. Accomplishing this goal will require study of ever-larger molecular assemblies chosen to answer specific biochemical questions. The biological systems that I have selected for initial study are the nucleo-protein assemblies that are formed at the sites of the initiation of DNA replication. Accurate replication of DNA is mediated by multi-protein assemblies that initiate DNA synthesis, elongate daughter strands, and assure the integrity of the catalyzed chemical reactions. We will use X-ray crystallography to determine the structure of selected functionally relevant assemblies with the goal of understanding biochemical data present in these systems. Structure determinations will be followed by functional studies of designed variants of these assemblies to test models of biochemical function. While the primary goal of this work will be to decipher biological function, studies of these assemblies are expected to provide the added benefit of making available much-needed targets for structure-based design of antibiotics and anti-cancer therapeutics. "
"NANCY  KLECKNER ","Herchel Smith Professor of Molecular Biology, ","Kleckner@fas.harvard.edu ","617-495-4278 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 301, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Behavior of chromosomes in bacteria and yeast We are interested in two aspects of chromosome metabolism: recombination and chromosome segregation. We analyze these processes in both prokaryotes (E. coli) and eukaryotes (yeast S. cerevisiae) using genetic, biochemical, and cytological methods. 1. Transposition in E. coli. The bacterial transposon Tn10 moves by a series of specific DNA breaking and joining events which require a Tn10-encoded transposase protein and accessory host proteins, IHF and HU. We wish to understand the precise nature andorder of reaction steps, the types of DNA/protein complexes involved, the way in which the transposon ends find one another, the mechanistic role of host factors, the importance of DNA topology, and the functional organization of transposase protein. 2. Meiosis in S. cerevisiae. During meiosis, homologous chromosomes recognize one another ("pair") and engage in recombination prior to, and as a prerequisite for, their segregation at the first meiotic division. We are examining the pairing and recombinaion processes, their control, and their integration with the cell cycle during meiosis in yeast. Genetic, cytological and biochemical approaches are used. 3. Control of replication initiation in bacteria. We are investigating the regulation of replication initiation in E. coli. We are analyzing the role of recently discovered negative regulatory protein, SeqA, which works in concert with DNA adenine methylaion at specific sites in the replication origin. We are also searching for new factors which may participate in replication timing and in maintaining coordination between initiation and cell division. "
"SAM  KUNES ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","kunes@fas.harvard.edu ","617-496-3806 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 329, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: The development and functional history of a nervous system is key to understanding its future role in directing behavior. My laboratory conducts research in a number of areas that fall within the broad confines of this topic, using the fruitfly Drosophila melanogaster as a system of choice.  Drosophila offers a unique opportunity to conduct investigations at the interface between development and behavior, to examine how behavior is modulated by the nervous system's functional plasticity, and to illuminate the relationship between genetic control and the evolutionary divergence of behavior. Current research in the laboratory includes a study of how a signaling protein, Hedgehog, is transported along axons of the developing visual system, a means by which the retina controls the number of target neurons for retinal axons in the brain. We study the converse problem of how contact between photoreceptor axons and their targets in the brain influences the final stages of photoreceptor neuronal differentiation, including the development of synapses.  With respect to the function and plasticity of the adult visual system, one investigation in the lab asks how visual experience is remembered, particularly with regard to the wavelength of light, as flies make directional choices in a walking maze. The aim of this project is to determine where and how such memories are encoded. Another study looks at how a protein involved in synaptic plasticity is synthesized locally in response to environmental inputs that produce a memory. A long-term goal of our work is to identify genetic differences that underlie behavioral changes associated with speciation, and relate these to developmental and functional differences in the nervous system. "
"ANDRES  LESCHZINER ","Assistant Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","aleschziner@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-2717 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Room 267C, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Structural biology of ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling The extreme degree of compaction of DNA into chromatin would seem to create an insurmountable barrier to all DNA transactions. However, a variety of mechanisms have evolved that allow cells to turn this apparent impediment into a highly dynamic and finely tuned regulatory device that controls the accessibility of specific DNA sequences. A multitude of players are involved in achieving this regulation. A number of protein factors are involved in covalently modifying chromatin&#8212;either DNA itself or the histone octamer around which DNA is wrapped. Another group, the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complexes, utilizes the energy from ATP hydrolysis to non-covalently modify nucleosomes. These remodelers are large (often above 1 MDa) multi-subunit complexes that are conserved from yeast to humans and their activity leads to a number of different fates for the remodeled nucleosomes: sliding along DNA, transfer to a different DNA segment, formation of a &#8220;loose&#8221; nucleosome structure and exchange of histone components. Despite a significant body of work describing these outcomes we do not yet understand mechanistically how ATP-dependent chromatin remodelers actually remodel chromatin. Our group is approaching this question from a structural point of view. We use primarily three-dimensional electron microscopy (3D EM) to study the ATP-dependent chromatin remodeling complex RSC (Remodels the Structure of Chromatin) from S.cerevisiae. This complex has been extensively characterized biochemically and genetically, making it an ideal model system. Electron microscopy is a powerful structural technique to study large macromolecular assemblies that are not amenable to more traditional methods either due to their low abundance (when purified from natural sources, for example) or refractory to crystallization (due to their intrinsic flexibility). More importantly, electron microscopy of vitrified samples (cryo-EM) holds the promise of allowing us to image&#8212;at high resolution and under physiological conditions&#8212;the conformational diversity present in and potentially central to the function of many macromolecular assemblies. The long-term goal of our research is to visualize the entire remodeling mechanism at high resolution in order to understand its chemical underpinnings. In the meantime, we are starting to dissect RSC at lower resolution. We have obtained an initial reconstruction of the complex and are in the process of obtaining one of RSC bound to its substrate, the nucleosome. At the same time, we will build a map of the positions of a number of the 15 different subunits that comprise RSC by tagging them and probing their location; this will help us better understand their biological role within the complex. The group is also interested in what remains one of the major challenges in 3D EM&#8212;obtaining initial models of novel samples. We recently developed a new reconstruction method (Orthogonal Tilt Reconstruction) that addresses some of the problems and limitations of existing approaches. We are interested in further developing this method and eventually automating it to make the generation of initial models a robust and routine aspect of 3D EM. "
"JEFF  LICHTMAN ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","jeff@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-8943 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 347.20, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: I am interested in the mechanisms that underlie synaptic competition between neurons that innervate the same target cell. Such competitive interactions are responsible for sharpening the patterns of neural connections during development and may also be important in learning and memory formation. My laboratory studies synaptic competition by visualizing synaptic rearrangements directly in living animals using modern optical imaging techniques. We have concentrated on neuromuscular junctions in a very accessible neck muscle in mice where new transgenic animals and other labeling strategies allow individual nerve terminals and postsynaptic specializations to be monitored over hours or months. In addition, we have developed several new methods to improve our ability to resolve synaptic structure. "
"RICHARD M. LOSICK ","Harvard College Professor, Maria Moors Cabot Professor of Biology, ","losick@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-495-4905 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 3023, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Our laboratory studies development in the spore-forming bacterium Bacillus subtilis. B. subtilis undergoes an elaborate cycle of cellular differentiation that culminates in the formation of a dormant cell type, the spore. Spore formation involves the transformation of a vegetative cell into a two-compartment sporangium by asymmetric division. The compartments receive an identical chromosome yet have dissimilar developmental fates involving differential expression of distinct sets of genes. We seek to elucidate the entire regulatory circuit that governs entry into sporulation, cell-specific gene expression, and the linkage of gene expression to landmark events in morphogenesis. Other topics of interest are protein subcellular localization, chromosome segregation, intercellular signaling, and the formation of architecturally complex communities of cells. "
"ROBERT A. LUE ","Professor of the Practice of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Tutor in Biochemical Sciences, Director of Life Sciences Education, ","robert_lue@harvard.edu ","617-495-9924 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 1081, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Our research focuses on defining and assessing how large research universities such as Harvard can more effectively foster new generations of scientists as well as science-literate citizens. Undergraduate education in the life sciences at Harvard has undergone a dramatic transformation in recent years. Life sciences education now encompasses collaboration between seven departments: Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Human Evolutionary Biology, Molecular and Cellular Biology, Organismic and Evolutionary Biology, Psychology, Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, and Biomedical Engineering in the School of Engineering and Applied Sciences. Noteworthy results of this collaboration include a novel, interdisciplinary set of foundation courses and a coordinated cluster of undergraduate concentrations that allows students to develop their interests in coherent areas of inquiry within the life sciences. Our research on the knowledge, habits of mind, and skill-sets that we hope to foster in students is organized around three critical facets of 21st century science. We believe that in addition to the role of Researcher, every good scientist also assumes the additional roles of Educator and Citizen. Too often these roles are viewed as competing with one another. We believe this is entirely unwarranted and that developing ways to promote synergy between the three roles is an essential part of training future scientists. To this end, our group seeks to develop and assess new methods to foster all three roles that together define a worthwhile life in science. To foster future scientists as Researchers, our current projects focus on new hands-on opportunities for undergraduates that include interdisciplinary connections between fields. In addition, we continue to develop novel multimedia tools that enable students to more rigorously interrogate models as they combine data from different experimental approaches. To foster future scientists as Educators, our current projects focus on ways to make teaching and mentoring a more integral part of how we train graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. To foster future scientists as Citizens, we are developing mechanisms for supporting the involvement of faculty, undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows in a range of science outreach activities. Current projects focus on ways to motivate and retain high school teachers, and to sustain long-term mentoring relationships with the children of neighboring communities. For more information on some of our projects: Bio Visions at Harvard Harvard Life Sciences Outreach Program Undergraduate Education in the Life Sciences "
"SUSAN  MANGO ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","Smango@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-7201 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, BL3015, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: To build organs, embryos have evolved mechanisms that integrate the development of complex populations of cells. Our group studies organ formation using a simple organ, the C. elegans pharynx (or foregut), that nonetheless faces the same hurdles that confront organs in more complicated animals. We combine molecular genetics, genomics and cell biological approaches to address four aspects of organogenesis: Pluripotency and cell-fate acquisition: Early embryonic cells are born pluripotent, but over time their developmental choices become restricted. We study the processes that mediate the transition from pluripotency to cell-fate acquisition, with a particular focus on the interplay between sequence-specific transcription factors, chromatin organization and nuclear architecture (Yuzyuk 2009, Kiefer 2007). Transcriptional logic of organogenesis: Our previous studies revealed that there are ‘organ selector genes’ that encode transcription factors and specify organ identity. We would like to understand how the pharynx selector gene pha-4 coordinates organ formation in space and time. We are particularly interested in the role of DNA binding affinity for temporal control and promoter priming (Gaudet 2002, 2004, Deplancke 2006, Updike 2006). Nutrition and post-embryonic development. Despite its simple organization, the nematode digestive tract is highly responsive to nutrient availability. Worms can adjust their rate of feeding, their energy utilization and, most dramatically, their development and growth. Our goal is to probe how the developmental pathways that govern gut development in embryos are redeployed after birth, to sense and respond to food. (Ao 2006, Sheaffer 2008). Epithelial tubes: Many organs, including the C. elegans pharynx, are systems of epithelial tubes that provide an essential function by transporting gases or liquids. Epithelial tubes can be formed by remodeling pre-existing sheets of epithelial cells or by constructing tubular epithelia de novo. Nephrons in the kidney are one example of de novo epithelialization, the C. elegans pharynx is another. While significant progress has been made towards understanding the mechanisms that govern folding of epithelial sheets, very little is known about tubulogenesis by de novo epithelialization. In C. elegans, the pharynx tube is formed in the absence of known epithelial regulators such as cadherins, integrins or catenins. A new direction for the lab is to elucidate cadherin-independent epithelial tube formation. "
"ANDREW P. MCMAHON ","Frank B. Baird, Jr., Professor of Science, ","mcmahon@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-3757 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 1059, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Vertebrate Development All higher organisms consist of large number of highly specialized cell types which are organized in precise patterns to generate the adult. The basic body plan is laid down early in life, during embryogenesis. Our goal is to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms which regulate growth, differentiation, and patterning of the vertebrate embryo. In particular, we are exploring the role of cell-to-cell signalling in the coordinate regulation of groups of cells during embryonic development of the mouse and chick. "
"MARKUS  MEISTER ","Jeff C. Tarr Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","meister@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-8301 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 209, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Function of Neural Circuits: My goal is to understand the function of neuronal circuits. By "circuit" I mean a brain structure with many neurons that has some anatomical and functional identity, and exchanges signals with other brain circuits. Most of our work has focused on the retina and the olfactory bulb, with some explorations into the visual cortex and the insect antennal lobe. "
"MATTHEW S. MESELSON ","Thomas Dudley Cabot Professor of the Natural Sciences, ","msm@wjh.harvard.edu ","617-495-2264 ","Sherman Fairchild, 7 Divinity Avenue, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Bdelloid Rotifers as a Model System for Investigating the Biology of Aging We are employing rotifers of Class Bdelloidea, a group of small freshwater invertebrates, as a particularly advantageous model system for investigating the causes and control of aging -- the progressive increase in death rate with age that occurs in adult humans and in other animals. Characteristics that make bdelloid rotifers a promising model system for such studies include: (i) parthenogenetic reproduction, assuring genetic homogeneity of progeny; (ii) very low or negligible death rate until egg deposition is completed, followed by an abrupt onset of aging manifested as an exponentially increasing (Gompertzian) death rate; (iii) extreme resistance of pre-aging bdelloids to ionizing radiation (IR) and IR-induced protein oxidation, allowing tests of the relation between aging and oxidative damage of a kind not possible in other organisms; (iv) completion of all somatic cell division before hatching, obviating replicative senescence as a possible complicating factor; (v) ease of culturing and production of even-age populations; (vi) normal mean life span of only a few weeks; (vii) transparency, allowing the use of fluorescence-based assays of reactive oxidative species (ROS) and oxidized protein on individual live animals; and (viii) a soon to be completed annotated genome sequence, allowing us to examine changes in specific gene expression accompanying the onset and progression of aging. Homologous genetic exchange in bdelloid rotifers Rotifers of Class Bdelloidea are common freshwater invertebrates whose ancient origin and apparent lack of sexual reproduction have posed the principal challenge to the generally held view that genetic transfer between individuals within a species is essential for its long-term evolutionary success.  We have recently found, however, that bdelloid rotifers do engage in homologous genetic transfer within a species (or clade) and are attempting to characterize the mode of such exchange and the population structure within which it occurs. We welcome applications to join our laboratory from qualified individuals committed to attacking and solving fundamental problems in biology. Applicants should send a CV and contact information for three persons who can provide strong recommendations. "
"ANDREW W. MURRAY ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Co-Director, Bauer Center for Genomics Research, ","amurray@mcb.harvard.edu ","617-496-1350 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 469.20, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: We use budding yeast to look for general principles that underlie the function and evolution of cells, as revealed by studying the transmission of genetic information during cell division, mating, and how cells evolve in response to selective pressure.  We try to make quantitative measurements that discriminate amongst different classes of models and members of the lab come from both biology and physics backgrounds.  In general, we are more interested in using genetic and physiological perturbations to understand the &#8220;rules of the game&#8221; than understand the chemical functions of individual proteins. How does mitosis segregate a cell's chromosomes into two identical sets before cell division? This question has fascinated biologists for over a century and is directly relevant to cancer and other important medical problems. We study two aspects of chromosome behavior: how chromosomes attach to the chromosome segregation machinery (the spindle) in mitosis and meiosis, and the spindle checkpoint, the control circuit that cells use to make sure that their chromosomes are properly lined up on the mitotic spindle before initiating chromosome segregation. Budding yeast has two mating types and can exist stably as both haploids and diploids.  We use microfluidics, video microscopy, and genetic manipulation to ask how cells pick a single axis of polarization when they are exposed to mating pheromones, how this axis is aligned to pheromone gradients, and how pairs of cells efficiently court and then fuse with each other in dense mixtures of mating cells.  Our results suggest that cells use the cytoskeleton to integrate signaling from all parts of the cell surface in way that guarantees a single axis of polarity. How does selective pressure induce the evolution of new traits and how predictable is the outcome of such experiments? We study both general and specific questions.  The general questions include attempting to use theory and experiment to determine how the rate of evolution depends on population sizes and the beneficial mutation rate, evolving altered mating preferences (a first step towards speciation), investigating the advantages of mutators, evolving cooperation, and determining the distribution of beneficial and deleterious mutations.  The more specific projects use the mating pathway and attempt to create connections to other signaling pathways and turn the pathway from a rapidly reversible and graded response into a stable switch that can be thrown by a single exposure to mating pheromone. "
"VENKATESH N. MURTHY ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, ","vnmurthy@fas.harvard.edu ","617-496-4833 ","The Biological Labs, 16 Divinity Avenue, Room 4027, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Synaptic circuits and experience-dependent plasticity The vast capacity of the brain to process and store information arises from the large number of neurons and their synaptic connectivity. Research in my laboratory is motivated by general questions of how synapses operate and how they contribute to information processing and adaptation in circuits. While much of our past research has been in simple and accessible model systems in vitro, our current and future work centers on intact circuits in the rodent brain. We continue to investigate mechanisms underlying activity-dependent synaptic plasticity in the rodent hippocampus, with an emphasis on inhibitory synapses. We are particularly interested in a phenomenon called homeostatic synaptic plasticity, which acts to compensate for chronic imbalances in neural activity. Our experiments aim to uncover rules and mechanisms by which persistent changes in activity alter different classes of inhibitory synapses. The rodent olfactory brain (the olfactory bulb and piriform cortex) is now a target of significant effort in my lab. We develop and use novel optical and physiological methods in the living animal to seek answers to the following general questions: How is odor information represented in the early stages of the olfactory system? What is the logic of functional synaptic circuits in the early stages of the olfactory system? How is information processing affected by different brain states - sleep, wakefulness and neuromodulation? How are functional circuits in the olfactory system regulated by odor experience? "
"DAVID R. NELSON ","Arthur K. Solomon Professor of Biophysics, ","nelson@physics.harvard.edu ","617-495-4331 ","Lyman Laboratory, 17 Oxford Street, Jefferson 366, Cambridge MA, 02138 ","Research: Much of Nelson's recent research has focused on problems that bridge the gap between the physical and biological sciences. Early work explored population dynamics in the presence of varying growth rates and convection, leading to universal predictions for the spreading and transverse profile of populations in space- and time-dependent environments. Together with his student, David Lubensky, Nelson developed a theory of force-induced denaturation of double-stranded DNA. Sequence heterogeneity dominates the dynamics of the un-zipping fork (with possible implications for DNA replication in prokaryotes) over a large of forces above an unzipping transition. Energy barriers near the transition scale as the square root of the genome size. Recent observations of jumps and plateaus in the unzipping of lambda phage DNA at constant force (the result of a collaboration with his colleague, Mara Prentiss) are consistent with these predictions. Sequence heterogeneity was also predicted to have a re-markable effect on the dynamics of motor proteins such as helicases, exonulceases and RNA polymerases, leading to sublinear drift in time of these complex enzymes and a possible expla-nation for the nearly horizontal velocity-force curves observed near the stall force in experi-ments on RNA polymerase. Nelson and colleagues have also studied the shapes of viruses, showing that the icosahedral packing of protein capsomeres of spherical viruses becomes un-stable to faceting for sufficiently large virus size. A parametization of the architecture of virus shells in terms of single dimensionless "von Karman number" shows why small viruses are round and large ones are faceted, and allows important information about the elastic constants to be extracted from electron micrographs. "
"ERIN  O'SHEA ","Professor of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Investigator, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Professor of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Director, Harvard FAS Center for Systems Biology, ","erin_oshea@harvard.edu ","617-495-4328 ","Northwest Building, 52 Oxford Street, NW 445.40, Cambridge MA, 02138 ",